One formula dentists use for cavities
is carbohydrates plus bacteria plus teeth.
Your mouth is home to thousands of
bacteria of different types.
Many are not harmful
but some can be highly destructive.
One type that thrives in an oral environment
and is often present in large quantities
is the mutans streptococcus group.
When you eat carbohydrates, so do they.
And they metabolize carbs into acid,
which can strip minerals
from the tooth’s outer layer.
Over time this process,
known as demineralization,
can extend through the enamel
into the dentin and then the core or pulp,
which contains nerves and blood vessels.
Bacteria can then move in as well.
When a bacterial infection at the center
causes pus to collect,
a person is said to have a tooth abscess.
Sometimes the pulp dies.
The infection can spread to the gums,
cheek, jaw, throat, and facial bones.